- [Instructor] Now let us talk about another API
which is the HTTPServletRequest object.
We have been using this API over and over
in all our previous demos.
Now whenever you make a request
from the client to the server,
the request is represented in terms of this object.
This is the one which extends the ServletRequest API
and provides all the request information
to the HTTP servlets.
It consists of two parts, the headers and the body.
The headers is all the extra information
that you may need for the request,
let's say, what type of content are you sending
from the client to the server.
Or let's say what is the browser information.
Which is the browser through which
you are making this request?
So all this kind of extra information
sits usually in the form of headers.
The body, however, will contain the data
that you are sending along with the request.
As for the get request, the data is never in the body
but it is always visible in the URL
in the form of a query string.
HTTPServletRequest object is a huge one
but we are just going to take a look
at some important API calls.
The first one is request.getSession
which will help you get the HTTPSession API
responsible for doing session management in the application.
We will talk about session management
in the later part of this course.
We have another API call which is request.getHeader,
so when you pass the header name as an argument
it'll return you the value of that header through this API.
The next API call is request.getRequestURI,
which is going to return you the part
starting from the protocol name up to the query string
for a particular URL.
request.getParameter is going to return you the data
from the requester object and we've used this
in our previous videos as well.
request.getCookies call is going to get you
all the cookies that the browser sent
as a part of a particular request.
We are going to look at cookies when we take a look
at the Session Management topic.
And lastly, you have request.getMethod,
which will return you the kind of request
that you made from your client.
So, let's say you will make a GET request
and request.getMethod is going to return you GET.
If you make a POST request then request.getMethod
is going to return as POST and so on and so forth.
Please remember that in case of the POST request
the body is going to hold that payload component
which has got all the data, and hence
that data is never going to be visible in the URL.
So that's about that HTTPServletRequest object.
Now let us talk about the HTTPServletResponse object.
The way we have HTTPServletRequest of course
response is the other bit of that entire
chain of communication that happens
between the client and the server.
HTTPServletResponse API extends the ServletResponse API
and represents all the response information
that you want to write back to the client.
Of course, this again is a huge object,
but let's look at a few important API calls.
The first one is response.sendRedirect,
which demands a string URL.
If you remember and recall,
we have already discussed this API
in the redirection concept,
which helps us to do redirection that's going out
to another application altogether.
Another API call is response.addCookie.
If you exclusively want to save some cookies
from the server back to the browser software,
then you can do that
by invoking this API call called addCookie.
This demands a cookie object,
and you can store the cookie name.
You can also store the time for which
this cookie's going to remain alive in the browser.
That entire cookie object can be returned
as part of the response.
The next one is response.EncodeURL.
Now this is something that's got to do with
the session management again, as a part of URL rewriting,
that we will see in the later part of this course.
Response.setContentType will give you the option
to set a proper content value for the response.
Let's say I'm trying to write a response
which is in the form of a PDF document.
Or let's say it's an HTML response.
So I can exclusively set the content type
to this response object, using this API call.
Next API is response.getStatus.
Whenever a request is sent from the client to the server,
the server is going to do the processing
and send you a response back.
Now the response could either be a success or a failure.
Each of these responses always has an integer status code.
That is what you get out of this API call.
So let's say, if the status is 200,
it means it's a success operation.
If the status is 404, it means
it was not able to find one of your pages.
If it was 500, it means it's some internal server error.
If it is 403, then it means
you're forbidden to access that resource.
So there are a lot of status codes like these,
and you'll be able to fetch that information via this API.
Lastly, we have response.getWriter,
which we have been using all over
to get the print writer
and write some response to the web page.
Like the request object,
the response object also has got headers and body.
Body is exactly the place where all the response
that you have written out from the servlet sits in,
whereas the headers contain the extra information,
like, say, the content type, et cetera,
that goes as a part of the response.
So that's what HTTPServletResponse object looks like.